---
description: A shameless adaption of Paul's BIOL 3320 Lab.
---

# 1.2.2A: Fish identification (BIOL 3320)

## Objective

To identify the species of various samples of sushi or fish purchased from a local supermarket.

## Required and recommended software

None! You should be able to complete this with just web-based resources.

## **Background**

Imagine you're at the local supermarket. How can you be sure that the $40 Japanese saba in the container is actually what it says it is? Fish products in particular can be difficult to verify by appearance alone. In fact, reports have suggested that mislabeling of fish is a common occurrence in the Metro Vancouver area. Like in a great crime story, DNA testing can be the best determinant of true identity.

There are many methods available for determining the species identity of a tissue sample using its DNA. Based at the University of Guelph, a very large collaborative project called the Barcode of Life (BOL) has been operating for several years. The system is based on having researchers sequence the same region of DNA for every sample. For animal samples, the region chosen for the BOL project is from the 5' region of the mitochondrial Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I gene (_COI_ aka _COX1_). (Fungi and plants use different sequences for barcoding.) Since this project has garnered great interest from the scientific community, it is now possible to identify over 308,000 different species using the Barcode of Life Data (BOLD) Identification System (IDS). To use it, just enter a COI sequence of the sample into their service at [http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS\_OpenIdEngine](http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS\_OpenIdEngine) and it will look for a match, and then report the identity of the most-likely species.

A commercially available kit called the GeneJET® Genomic DNA Purification Kit (ThermoFisher) was used for the isolation of total DNA from the fish samples. Then the COI region of mitochondrial DNA was amplified using PCR. Agarose gels were be run to determine which PCRs were successful, and the best samples were sequenced.

<details>

<summary>Benchtop Methods</summary>

#### Part 1. DNA extraction and purification

1. Use a razor to scrape a sliver of each fish tissue into a 1.5 mL tube. Be careful not to mix up the razors and cross-contaminate.
2. Add 180 μL digestion solution to each tube.
3. Add 20 μL proteinase K to each tube.
4. Grind the fish into the proteinase K and digestion solution with an Eppendorf micropestle. Again, make sure not to mix cross-contaminate!
5. Incubate in a shaking incubator at 56°C at 100 rpm for 30 minutes.
6. Add 20 µL RNAseA to each tube. Incubate at room temperature for 10 minutes.
7. Add 200 µL of lysis solution. Mix well.
8. Add 400 µL of 50% EtOH. Mix well.
9. Check to see that the tissues have dissolved into solution. If you have solid tissue in the tube, try to break it up by pipetting up and down in the tube.
10. Transfer lysates to GeneJET columns. Avoid transferring solid pieces of fish tissue into the column.
11. Spin at 6000×g for 1 minute, then discard supernatant into the waste beaker
12. Place each column into a new 2 mL collection tubes.
13. Add 500 µL of wash buffer I to each column. Spin for 1 minute at 8000×g, then discard supernatant into the waste beaker.
14. Add 500 µL of wash buffer II to each column. Spin for 3 minutes at maximum speed, then discard supernatant into the waste beaker.
15. Transfer each spin column to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube.
16. Add 50 µL of elution solution to the center of the spin column.
17. Incubate at room temperature for 3 minutes.
18. Spin at 8000×g for 1 minute and retain the DNA samples.

#### Part 2: PCR amplification

Because the species of the sample is unknown, a cocktail of primers (2 forward, 2 reverse) will be used. The sequences of the primers are the first 4 of Table 1 in the Hu et al. paper.

<pre data-title="PCR mix"><code>Reagent                  Volume (µL) in each PCR reaction    
<strong>ddH₂O                    15
</strong><strong>fish primer cocktail      5
</strong><strong>fish DNA                  5
</strong><strong>Taq master mix           25
</strong><strong>
</strong><strong>Total volume             50
</strong></code></pre>

1. For each fish DNA sample, set up PCR reactions in a 0.2 mL PCR tube, on ice. Use the recipe shown above.
2. Keep your PCR tubes on ice by the thermocycler. Remember to write your group initials and tube number on the thermocycler sign up sheet.
3. The thermocycler will run through the following program: \
   94°C × 3 minutes,\
   35 cycles of (94°C × 1 minute, 55°C × 1 minute, 72°C × 1 minute), \
   72°C × 10 minutes

</details>

## Analysis

After having completed the experiment, students received the following sequencing results. Work through the following:

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Sample A" %}
{% code title="Labeled as tilapia" overflow="wrap" %}
```
>Sample A
AWMTTRTTGTATGTAGTATATGGTGCTTGAGCCGGAATCGTAGGAACCGCGCTAAGCCTCCTAATTCGGGCAGAACTAAGCCAGCCCGGCTCTCTCCTCGGAGACGACCAGATTTATAATGTAATTGTTACAGCACATGCTTTTGTAATAATTTTCTTTATAGTAATGCCAATTATGATTGGAGGCTTTGGAAACTGACTAGTACCACTCATGATTGGTGCCCCAGATATGGCCTTCCCTCGAATGAACAACATGAGTTTCTGACTCCTCCCTCCCTCATTCCTCCTCCTCCTCGCCTCATCTGGAGTCGAAGCAGGTGCCGGCACAGGGTGAACTGTTTACCCCCCGCTCGCAGGYAATCTTGCCCATGCTGGGCCTTCTGTCGACTTAACCATCTTCTCCCTCCACTTGGCCGGGGTGTCATCTATTCTAGGCGCAATTAATTTCATTACAACAATCATTAACATGAAACCCCCCGCCATCTCTCAATATCAAACACCCCTATTTGTATGGTCCGTTCTAATTACCGCAGTATTACTTCTTCTATCCCTACCCGTTCTTGCCGCCGGCATCACAATACTTCTCACAGACCGAAACCTAAACACAACCTTCTTTGATCCTGCCGGAGGAGGAGACCCCATCCTTTACCAACACTTATTCTGATTCTTCGSSCYCCCCTSCTMCW
```
{% endcode %}
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="Sample B" %}
{% code title="Labeled as tilapia" overflow="wrap" %}
```
>Sample B
YYWMGTTCTTTATAGTAATACCAATTATGATTGGAGGCTTTGGAAACTGACTAGTACCCCTCATGATTGGTGCACCAGACATGGCCTTCCCTCGAATAAATAACATGAGCTTTTGACTTCTCCCCCCCTCATTTCTTCTTCTTCTCGCCTCATCTGGAGTCGAAGCAGGTGCCGGCACAGGATGGACTGTTTATCCCCCGCTCGCAGGCAATCTTGCCCACGCTGGACCTTCTGTTGACTTAACCATCTTCTCCCTCCACTTGGCTGGAGTGTCATCTATTTTAGGTGCAATTAATTTTATCACAACCATTATTAACATGAAACCCCCTGCTATCTCCCAATATCARACACCCCTATTTGTGTGATCCGTCCTAATTACCGCAGTACTACTCCTTCTATCCCTGCCCGTTCTTGCCGCCGGCATCACAATACTTCTAACAGACCGAAACCTAAACACAACCTTCTTTGACCCTGCCGGAGGAGGAGACCCCATCCTATMCWTGR
```
{% endcode %}
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="Untitled" %}
{% code title="Labeled as saba" overflow="wrap" %}
```
>Sample C
KARYWSMKGGATAGTATGTGGTGTCTGAGCCGGAATAGTAGGAACCGCGGTAAGCTTCCTAATTCGGGTAGAACTAAGCCAGCCCGGCTCTCTCCTCGGAGACGACCAGATTTATAATGTAATTGTTACAGCACATGCTTTTGTAATAATTTTCTTTATAGTAATGCCAATTATGATTGGAGGCTTTGGAAACTGACTAGTACCACTCATGATTGGTGCCCCAGATATGGCCTTCCCTCGAATGAACAACATGAGTTTCTGACTCCTCCCTCCCTCATTCCTCCTCCTCCTCGCCTCATCTGGAGTCGAAGCAGGTGCCGGCACAGGGTGAACTGTTTACCCCCCGYTCGCAGGCAATCTTGCCCATGCTGGGCCTTCTGTCGACTTAACCATCTTCTCCCTCCACTTGGCCGGGGTGTCATCTATTCTAGGCGCAATTAATTTCATTACAACAATCATTAACATGAAACCCCCCGCCATCTCTCAATATCAAACACCCCTATTTGTATGGTCCGTTCTAATTACCGCAGTATTACTTCTTCTATCCCTACCCGTTCTTGCCGCCGGCATCACAATACTTCTCACAGACCGAAACCTAAAKRYWSSW
```
{% endcode %}
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Questions

1. Look at the [sequencing results](#user-content-fn-1)[^1]. We see nucleotides that are not `A`, `T`, `C`, or `G`. What are they and what do they represent?
2. Make sure to review the benchtop methods. Walk yourself through the protocols. What sources of technical errors might arise that could affect your sequencing results?
3. Use the website ([http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS\_OpenIdEngine](http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS\_OpenIdEngine)) with `Species Level Barcode Records` selected. Determine the species ID of all the samples. If it says "no match", use the convenient blue box with a link to BLAST.
4. Try using NCBI BLASTN ([https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi](https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi)) to identify your samples. Compare the results.
5. Were any of the samples mislabeled? Which ones?
6. Write a brief description of three "real world" examples of species identification using DNA barcoding.&#x20;

<details>

<summary>Further Questions</summary>

Double-peaks that arise from heterozygosity (i.e., reading a different nitrogenous base in the same position on different strands) are processed as degenerate nucleotides in FASTA files. How might we determine that these are truly heterozygous SNPs?

</details>

[^1]: Note that they are in FASTA-format.&#x20;
